hey everyone we have a very special
episode for you today a few months ago
we were contacted by the make-a-wish
Foundation which is a nonprofit
organization dedicated to granting
life-changing wishes for children with
critical illnesses they're reaching out
to us on behalf of a young boy named
Evan who loves the command zone and
wished to be a part of this show in some
way so last week after months of
planning Evan and his family flew in
from Virginia and arrived at our studio
in Los Angeles to kick off two days of
commander packed fun we spent the first
night gathering all of the game nights
alumni from the area and jamming games
of EDH into the wee hours of the night
and it was a blast now there's a lot of
misunderstanding about make-a-wish and
the kinds of cases they take on Evan
suffers from tuberous sclerosis complex
or TSC a rare genetic disorder that
causes tumors to grow all throughout the
body his condition is not terminal but
it is very serious he's already had
brain surgery twice he suffers from
frequent seizures and TSC is something
he's gonna have to deal with for the
rest of his life but despite all of his
health difficulties Evan is an amazing
and upbeat kid with an infectious laugh
just a pleasure to be around
and trust me when I say he's a commander
aficionado yeah the dude is no joke you
got to be on your toes when you're in
the game with them because literally
anything might happen
he even runs a magic Club at his local
high school so the next day we had yet
another special surprise for him mark
rosewater head of magic Rd stopped by to
hang out play commander and record an
episode of the podcast which you're
about to watch Wizards of the coast card
Kingdom and ultra Pro also all
generously donated tons of swag for Evan
to take home with him we're talking
sleeves deck boxes play mats booster
packs you name it we can't thank our
sponsors enough for being part of this
special day I mean look at that smile it
just doesn't get any better than that so
we hope you enjoyed this week's episode
it was Evans own idea for a topic and
we're honored to help bring it to life
and please stick around after the
episode if you want to learn more about
make-a-wish the torus chlorosis
alliance and now you can lend your
support to kids just like Evan
greetings humans you have entered the
commands your destination for all
aspects of elder dragon Highlander enjoy
your stay yes that was the best song
I've ever sung okay which tells you how
good are the rest of our singing yes
exactly
well hello everyone welcome you're
watching slash listen in the commands
own podcast i'm your host jimmy long how
is it it's Josh leak why today we have
two very special guests we have Evan
Moss he's here visiting us from the
make-a-wish Foundation I have bye Evan
it's pleasure to have you here yeah
Evan actually came up with the topic for
today's show and came up with a lot of
the bullet points and everything to
making our life easier
I always appreciate that you're welcome
back anytime Evan and of course singing
beside me is one of the founding fathers
he's on the Mount Rushmore of magic oh
wow how does that feel to be put on a
mountain indeed
so Marc is here visiting you're gonna go
to comic-con tomorrow I am I'm a big
announcement this weekend I'm talking
about what the false that's gonna be
about time you see this video you all
have heard all of the news about it so
that's very exciting
we don't know yet but I don't want to
spoil the surprise for myself I'll be
watching the panel or reading the tweets
about it when it comes Saturday right
yeah yeah I like that panel every year I
won't be in the audience this year
though I'll just be following somebody
else live tweeting yeah it's my favorite
part of magic announcements you get to
see pictures on Twitter of a picture on
the projection screen so as far away as
you can get be like I can feel the
excitement I don't know if you're
allowed to say are they gonna be sub
cards are we go see a Carter - uh not
exactly
okay alright I won't push you on that
we'll see art so you
a lot of our excellent awesome awesome
so Evan you came up with this topic you
run like a playgroup at your school is
that correct yes I do
what how does that work well we my
middle school started a mentoring Club
it carried on for two years and then we
moved into high school for it so it's
it's carried on through high school you
followed from middle school to high
school well it's my first year so I
don't know if it's gonna continue next
year but if there was any impetus to
keep it going I hope this podcast gives
it that necessary you know I mean
hopefully we're gonna talk about some
common mistakes that new commander
players make Evan comes in contact with
a lot of new players not just new to
commander but new to magic also we're
gonna do a little section on sort of
teaching and shepherding new players
into magic and then specifically
commander but before we get into all
that we got to give a quick shout out to
our sponsors if you get a card keenum
comm slash command zone to order all
your magic products singles anything at
all you really are supporting this show
game nights all of our content and ultra
pro as well
as you can tell we all have amazing play
mats all play by oh I got the best one
by far
every storm anime Soren mark I want to
know were you a fan of like the whole
anime suite right yes I don't know who
made that decision but please give them
a high-five from me is rigidly done by
the Japanese office just solely as a
thing to promote in Japan oh cool and
then we saw it I'm like oh that's pretty
cool
it passed culturally on so yeah ultra
pro as well and of course the following
sports show up patreon that come slash
commands and directly and we shout that
one lucky patron every single month week
week every single week we do it every
month - yeah you rock thank you all
right into the main topic here I think
whether you're like new to magic or just
new to Commander or maybe you're a
veteran player who is dealing with some
new players that this all these little
tips will be helpful to you so how big
is your how big is your play group Evan
well we got some what actually big
bursts that the vast meeting at the
school year and it got to about one
dozen
so you're about 12 people better than
our boy how many people would you say
are like new to magic or denuded
commander in it in there probably about
half yeah oh so a lot yeah so a lot of
you are sort of teaching the other ones
how to either get into commander or do
you play mainly commander we almost
appear lipe commander nice good man
okay and you you're the one that
shepherded the love of commander in yeah
pretty much um before I came in we had
two other people at the club in middle
school who stayed commander and we had
about three or four other people in that
club in general and I paid command and a
few other people from the other tables
came to watch and they were like hey I
won't do that is you said you had like
the last meeting of the group basically
was one of the larger ones do you think
like you're seeing a lot more new magic
players is because arena or something
like that um I think that's possible
I mean I think it might just be that you
know magic is growing in general it is I
mean I feel like I'm seeing that right
now I mean magic the last quarter laughs
our second quarter out in 2019 with the
best magics ever done ever history yeah
holy mole of people are playing magic
yeah I remember when you did a poll as
well on your Twitter mark that was
competing like limited versus commander
it was such a tight race do you think
commanders actually pulling ahead now
I mean commander keeps growing you know
I mean there's a lot of just different
audiences and I think commander is
absorbing more and more of a casual
crowd right um and so yeah I mean it's
getting bigger or so yeah and it seems
great for high school clubs for a great
reason for people to play you know in a
multiplayer setting as well do you think
that's something that appeals to a lot
of kids at the school you're at I think
it does i mean we have evolved of gaming
clubs by that i mean like how a game
board game and video game and a lot of
the ones with more than two players are
doing a lot better
ah it was just like the social
interaction yeah yeah well me one is
pretty intense I'm not gonna lie I like
playing with more to people that lose I
could always blame it on me focus either
way so yeah the senior player of the
group right
all right so uh Evan you sort of started
a list of things that I think one of the
one of the things Jimmy and I have run
into is as we've done the show more we
don't come into contact with new players
as much because if they're online
already like googling best commander
deck and yeah our stuff they're already
out of the new player phase yeah and so
I thought this was a good opportunity
for us to sort of talk about people who
are new to Commander and new to magic in
general and give some tips because I do
think arena is causing a lot of people
to discover magic and then now walk into
their LGS or walk into maybe like a club
or something at school and be like I
sorta know how to play and I'm ready to
try this yeah and so I think it's good
for people out there just or to know how
to handle that right yeah good to know
yeah so this applies to even if you're
not gonna play commander a lot of these
tips apply to just regular 1v1 whether
you go to a pre-release or just want to
play in general and one you know up your
game a little bit so yeah also something
that's very common is a lot of times
people know you play magic and then if
they're interested they'll come to you
and say oh I'm interested in learning
could you help me learn that's a very
common right we track how people start
playing magic and one of the most common
ways is a friend teaches them that's a
very learned something like this right
yeah yeah perfect yeah that's how I
learned I was in high school and my
friends were playing and there was four
of them and they were like well there's
five colors in magic this is literally
1993 we needed we needed the fifth color
multiplayer from the beginning I mean
there's no rules associated with how it
works yeah it was yeah and of course I
got green because the color nobody
wanted at that time but that's how I
learned they were like would you want to
be green I was like I don't know if that
means for sure
so that's exactly how I learned I think
you're green to the format and green
it's in our staff say the green is the
most popular beginning player color I
mean back now back in like unlimited
serene was not that great yeah jank
grows best card magic you brought up
that green is one most popular began cuz
and I would like to second that I've
seen love new commander players play
mono green knife or seen em Fay grew or
semuc avoid well what we've learned is
that red and green by the nature what
the colors are are just a little more
direct Lane is play creatures attack and
ready
you know throw lightning bolts whatever
your throat damage and play some small
creatures where something like blue you
have two very popular established player
color array but beginners are like
counterspell complicated trait for my
turn my creatures sideways in bash you
yeah so it makes total sense so we're
gonna go down the list here of some
things Evan that you've noticed that new
commander players may be common mistakes
that they make the first point you have
is lack of removal and hate yeah we
talked about that a little bit of course
um I've noticed about that new players
they are prepared for when their game
thing doesn't work out they don't
respond a lot and they are focused which
is good they know what the attack wants
to do this is one that kind of
contradicts my later ones but if they're
focused they don't remove creatures they
don't have a graph don't have single tag
removal they don't have no defect they
all have enchanting removal sometimes
even the foul fact and chairman ramp
right and you wrote here that being able
to disrupt your opponent's plans are
really big do you think that because
sometimes and I had the same thing when
you make a first deck you're like I want
to do this and this is all I'm gonna do
if someone else disrupts their plan they
sort of get an idea of like oh maybe
this is something that I need to be
doing to other players as well
yeah and you guys have BOTS up somewhere
on the show recent not recently but you
general Josh you've have done Voltron a
fair bit because one google spell it's
gone and that's that feels a lot like
this but right a building Voltron might
they say new player builds now set they
don't give it any way get instructable
give it any way to come back or anything
they just want to make no set as big as
possible yeah I think you know I even do
this sometimes now where it's like new
commander comes out really sweet and the
commander says you know I want to do X
whatever the thing is on it and so I
think of these millions of cards and
they're all gonna work with my commander
and then you get it to a game and
somebody's like no it plays a dictate of
air boss and you're like I can never
remove that because when you're Billy
deck you're not like well you know would
be really exciting if I had three
disenchant spells in my deck
but you still need those spells because
what do you do when they play those
Silver Bullet cards against you yeah and
I mean this that's the same thing and
like even me I have a feather deck and
yesterday I paid a new taste of deck and
they paid a dictate Erebos on me and the
co-ceo combo'd with it and was just like
I was never I was never able to keep
feather and you can't deal with that and
I was trying to dig a vault for those
and Cham and move all spells yeah you
you need to have them in your deck but I
mean I've had decks where I like because
I was in that same game with you and the
dictate was really bad for me and I had
a tutor spell basically for a creature
and I'm like well what do I have and I
looked at my entire deck nothing I don't
have a free trade I can do anything
about it
so it's like you know that's bad deck
building don't do that but you know I
think this is a good lesson that even
veteran players can learn which is yeah
you need to be able to you know no
matter how will you build your deck
sometimes they're gonna play cards that
you have to deal with yeah yeah and
again we'll come back to this evolve
this is deck building and a few of these
even veteran players can fall into
repeated me right and I have I will
admit I am somewhat news command I've
been doing it for about two three years
and I am still trying to get over a few
of these so yeah I think one of the big
things that we wrote down here in the
outline too is that sometimes people
like a car like dictate aver bows
against a Voltron deck that car just
feels unfair you can't leave a creature
indestructible to get around it but you
know R&D throughout its history has
created ways for any color almost for
the most part to be able to deal with
troublesome enchantments or troublesome
cards that they can't deal with so yeah
but also that's why Sagada is so good
right hey cause you sacrifice your
commander and then you give I'm scum
we're ant in a little bit here you give
Scott indestructible give scout a shroud
you can't sacrifice it and you just
loose this together back in my vagin
I am definitely accusing them okay so
what what kind of car would you like to
see is me
yeah I had a question for you mark
because this is probably something that
you run into which is I think new
players have a tendency to see a certain
effect and just because they're new
their brain just kind of goes that's
unbeatable yeah that cards too powerful
it's unfair yeah magic is designed to be
what we call rock-paper-scissors which
is there's an answer to everything just
in Matt I mean not every color is every
answer and you know but the idea is the
game is built so we'll hear threats and
your answers to the threats and right
when you're building a deck you want to
not just think about your threats you
want think for your answers because part
of playing specially in commander is a
lot of back and forth right um but
there's a lot of cards magic and there's
a lot of answers and a lot of times it's
funny that if you have a problem and you
start researching you'll find some very
clever solutions when you know mm-hmm
like I know today they were talking
about in fact online and now we don't
really let you remove poisoned counters
like one tile beaches did it we let it
go but there are cards that like prevent
you from getting counters or there's
things that can remove counters from the
opponent's and that break but maybe team
up with somebody but the idea is you
have to be creative when you're looking
at solutions because there's a lot of
magic cards and a lot of times the
answer is something that's a little more
sometimes it's very direct but sometimes
it's oh here's an answer but it's not
quite as obvious little roundabout way
of going about it yeah and if the nature
of it being a singleton format means you
don't need to play for us so you can
have four different answers in slightly
different ways of different things and
being flexible that way I think is a
great thing to teach new players
especially to being like don't get
frustrated get creative
yes frustrated get creative yeah let's
make a t-shirt genuinely that's probably
the most important thing to teach new
players don't get frustrated for one
game it won't happen every time right
creative you can work around it alright
so the next point on this list is a
little bit related it's lack of focus so
Evan you mentioned that new players have
a tendency for their deck to be sort of
over ambitious try to do too many things
I have seen new players bring in to me
I've seen most players most new players
when they build their own deck they have
two areas one they focus in on one area
and forget to leave anything else out
there is the nuclear building as though
they put
in solving Simic Signet and then the
rest creatures
the other one is why Colver Braddock
because but I of course can do
everything new players want to do
everything right they don't focus in on
an artifacts theme they don't dig down
for the out of facts they might just be
like oh I won't have some knife game
since you so I don't have these
synergies where maybe I can put in some
spectacle car what's like these are
these are cool cards they fit the colors
so why shouldn't they be in the deck yes
right right mark you were a writer you
were a screenwriter this is something in
all creative disciplines and especially
unlike writing and creating that I find
which is like you have to make choices
yes right you have all these ideas and
these this be plot and the see plot or
wherever and you have to be like yeah
but there needs to be one major through
line generally for stuff like that
otherwise none of it works like I'm try
and do too much stuff then you do
nothing yeah well in writing they teach
you that if you write a scene if you
take the scene out well that will work
and the answer is yes and then take the
scene out then why is it and it kind of
makes sense with deck-building too
because a lot of times we've talked
about this as kind of like synergy
ception kind of like how many layers
right you go away from your main plan
before it starts to actively hurt itself
yeah so like if something's like my main
plan is to make tokens with this deck so
I can have a bunch of stuff that deals
with if I have a lot of creatures that
works but then sometimes people will add
in like oh but I'm gonna be sacrificing
my tokens and I also want to be like I
don't know like using them as fuel for
something else or like some of the
tokens I'm creating our artifact tokens
so they'll put an effects I'm gonna put
in an artifact something and now you're
like so far away from the token making
thing to play the artifact synergy cards
are like two steps from the token making
and that's just gonna it's gonna jam you
up more than its gonna help you right so
many times you're gonna have the
artifact synergy card like cork clan
ironworks or something you're like well
I made separate links those are an
artifact this card does nothing yeah I
have tried so many times to make like
say for the boils commanded that partner
with each other I don't member with NIR
Sun speaker and
partner life yeah the power ones from a
Laban's yeah dragon in the Knights yes
yes
tried to make one of those and I've
tried I've tried to make a deck with
those and I've tried to make a double
tribal theme but it just doesn't work
you you have to put in so many choose a
creature type effects they have like you
say this choose creature type it costs
one that's to cast a two best cast or
whatever but only synergizes one half of
the deck and yeah either half and then
like for the Knights you put in the
columns kolavari kolavari and then it
just doesn't work cuz to offer you draw
one half of your deck and it doesn't
match what the other half yeah yeah I
was playing at once and I had John all
of my dragon tribal cards and all
Knights I had like one dragon the entire
game it was my commander yeah
know where you want to be another real
common thing I know is when you have a
theme and so you pick things that go
with the theme but those things
contradict each other I usually put Y in
an example which is gold white works
really well with sacrifice or it can go
really well with team boosting but those
two things don't go together right you
have to sort of pick which direction
you're going like if I want to make go
wide with sacrifice that's great if I
want to go wide with boosting that's
great but there are anti center there
ender synergistic even though right both
of them go through main theme' they
don't go with each other yeah another
thing you have to watch for is that
you're supporting themes match each
other is that a thing in design where
you kind of give those choices to
players so they can figure that stuff
out or is that a thing where you don't
try and give them choices so they don't
get tripped up well the way it works in
design is you figure out your main
themes and then you weave in synergies
and those those synergies don't need to
go along with each other necessarily but
just one of enough synergies that things
can combo together so for example let's
say we're doing a set that has a go Y
you know there's a lot of token making
or something maybe black and sacrificing
creatures and maybe white is pumping
creatures so like well if you're going
to build it with black you go this right
you can build with white you go that
route and so if different colors are
doing different things that's fine
because you pick and choose what colors
you're gonna break so you can't you
don't have the freedom and more limit
environments to go super super dude I
think on this topic
why would recommend to players doing
this is that your commanders cover
determine where you go don't let
commands affect where you go that the
color
if you want little token deck then maybe
you go with tape with the new taste uh
if you want go a bit Lister cats right
if you want go token and pump maybe you
go with wrist or deems well maybe you
just go with us Lesniak Amanda yeah I
let the the commander sort of give you
the roadmap of like oh yeah what choice
so you don't have to be like the world's
my oyster I can do everything I'll try
to do you much yeah that makes sense
personally again I try not let the
commander influence it as much I try not
the color influence oh okay yeah I think
over ambition is definitely something
that players can very easily fall into
just because if it's your first stick
ever why wouldn't it do everything you
know and I also think sometimes someone
watches the show like game nights or
someone watches someone else play a deck
and like wow they did X cool things but
I only have this commander can I make
this do that and so you kind of get
caught in this dilemma it's like well I
only get to make one deck so I got to do
everything I think being able to limit
yourself just is gonna create more fun
play opportunities too because you're
not going to find yourself in those feel
beds where you draw half your dragons
and none of your Knights or vice versa
yeah you're better off making a dragon
deck and then making a knight deck yeah
yeah yeah all right I've done with stuff
like that force I've done a swap out
mm-hmm so I have like okay I take out my
dragons upon my Knights oh nice so you
can just make it more focus one way or
the other
yeah yeah makes sense so the next common
mistake or the next piece of advice for
new commander players is synergy versus
power so you need to strike a balance I
think there's this idea and it's often
true that like synergy beats like raw
power of a single card but not always
mm-hmm always it the beat race then hey
pay one man and get a 1/1 right you made
the one ones an elf and I'm an elf decks
delivery betrays you often just be
better yeah you had something you called
the creature dilemma Evan do you wanna
talk about that okay this one's
prominent in just a few commanders like
I'm guy use the example mazui right mmm
the Simek one yeah they'll pop the card
I think made up so if you play small
creatures as air gets experience points
and then you can pop in very good cards
they pop up yeah
anytime you see a car named someone's
gonna feel like ah here we go
I'm just gonna name all the cars but I
use the teach them as putting in too
many creatures right right going back to
my friends deck Hiep face and is a deck
with 30 dance a soul going a Simic
Signet and then everything else
creatures like 60-something creature 6
is something creatures I think he needs
more land but yes continue he's super
lucky like every time though solving
Simek Signet every game yeah take it a
soaring Civic Signet obviously the
creature dilemma could be the it's the
artifact dilemma or the yeah whatever
anything because even in a red deck
you're not having 60 artifact right yeah
right you want some other things and I
think yeah it's really easy to look at
like an tomorrow or something mm-hmm
wants creatures you still want some
other stuff yeah but it's still strong
but could be better right like maybe you
have me maybe this kind goes back to I
was saying with that the cutters choose
because if you got the cutters choose
rather than Commander and have a commit
just have the commander be a synergy
piece then you won't fall into this
right you're gonna because you're in
green you're gonna have some rampant
growth and stuff yeah you have we're all
thinking the same card why does
autographed is a somewhat budget paper
so I'm just gonna warn you Evan that
going on shows like this and telling
your friends to make their decks
stronger will not make your life better
no yeah next time you guys meet with
your play
watch this episode okay let's move on to
the next point here and this is one of
my favorite ones on the entire list yes
that politics as a resource I think in
commander specifically new players don't
really think about that axis as one
that's available to them as a managed
that could be gained and they don't you
know they're just concentrating on their
cards did I get it cuz especially when
you're new to magic yeah it can be
you have your deck you don't think of
anyone elses yeah unless I'd say unless
the card specifically says you know join
forces or something that's gonna ask you
to work yeah with you someone else
otherwise it's just like this is my plan
I'm going to enact that but then here's
the thing evolve new players in the same
vein as this I've noticed that none of
them they like joined forces tempting
off and nothing they don't think like oh
I might picking it off this but so will
my opponents right so they they see the
asymmetrical effect and they think I
don't actually want that yes I want just
the thing for myself and this is kind of
I like new pace because they build
really weird and fun decks but they
never think to use politics and they
always think you gon betray them how do
you feel about politics in yeah I mean I
think one of the cool things about magic
is that there's a large moister play and
I think the thing about multiplayer play
is it's a multiplayer play is politics
unless you have defined roles like to
add a giant or something where everybody
you know and that one of the for example
one of the things that I always say is
think about what targets and then one
things about multiplayer play that's
different in a political thing is if
it's a target of fact sometimes the
correct answer is not using it for
myself but bribing somebody else of
trying to get something else to you know
help you you'll help them rain yesterday
I had a so of discord on two of my
opponents thanks to DJ ended up killing
the so discord but I could attack Josh
we had made a deal and he was like hey
also of discord him that you can kill
Josh and him and then I'm all open for
you and I'm like perfect
he's like also give you
extra tax that I'm like what are you
getting out of this teacher he's like
absolutely nothing okay
two of my opponents dead was what he was
getting yeah good time as some people
clarify that yes yes but I think that's
that's a situation where Evan and I had
made a deal where he couldn't attack me
for one turn because I had not destroyed
his thing or something to turn before
and then helpful to DJ to get you out so
that was me thinking of a way to use
politics as a resource if I don't do
this and I'm free to do something else
and I get what I want which is not
getting attacked again DJ was like I can
also use politics as a resource I'll
make it so you can attack a different
player so you're still upholding your
green with Josh but it'll still hit Josh
you know I think that is and it would
still the older commander damaged
because I was playing fat though again
right and when you play with veteran
commander players they're often like
okay I got the cards in my hand there's
the cards you have and then there's what
I can talk people into doing right and I
think the new commander players don't
think on that last level they're like
yeah I know what my cards are know what
your cards are that's all that the
options available to me but a lot of
times it's you know what are Jimmy's
cards and how can you use those to help
me I can see this being a very
intimidating thing to write you're
sitting down at the table for players
you don't really know anyone are you
gonna try and convince someone to do
something especially I think another
thing that new players fall into is what
feelings get hurt well if someone breaks
a promise and then they take it outside
the game so I would say if you're trying
to introduce politics as a resource to
new players you can keep it very simple
don't attack me off run around for this
we're all like one for once right not
like complex setups like if you don't do
this I'll do this and this and this and
at that point you're gonna do that right
which like I think would just be very
overwhelming for new players but I do
like the very basic just like hey look
don't attack me I can help you or don't
do X I'll do things yeah it's like a
very easy transactional exchange the big
thing for politics and this is true for
all commander players and not not just
new players again I've seen the veteran
play groups that don't use politics
think of politics as a free value like
you can use politics to get free cards
you can use Paul Gross to get free
damage on Josh
REE removal spell and someone else
that's not out of your debt could
someone else's yeah it's helpful you
mostly use it against Josh that's the
key to politics is explain to other
people why helping you helps them right
yeah yeah yeah if you don't do that why
are they gonna do it
I often like starting with like a
question to like who are you gonna
attack with that yeah it starts a
conference they have to respond you ask
them a question and that's a soft way
it's like I'm gonna do this you do that
right it's a lot easier to be like ask a
question who are you gonna talk with
that thing or do you have a removal
spell or do you have a way to deal with
that that's a question they're gonna
respond that starts a dialogue there you
go you're politicking one thing I really
like to do is put yourself in the shoes
of someone else so for instance the
dictate aver Bose is out and you're
playing feather I'll go oh man heaven
that cards really bad for you isn't it
like you only have one creature and then
that asks the question almost for the
player away but you know maybe it
affects you too in which case Josh like
it really did affect you there so it's a
good way it was bad for both of us don't
you though so I think these matter cuz
your Creator just died every round yeah
maybe maybe my favorite use of politics
is is general like awareness so everyone
understands what's happening so everyone
can at least make a more and better
informed decision as a group yeah very
comment I think early politics thing is
I'm about to die and you say to people
would having me stay in the game be
better for you you know right me it does
me dying help one player more than helps
other players hey maybe it's good for
everybody but that one player to keep me
in the game yeah very true because if
there's somebody's like way in the lead
a lot of times if let's say there's
three players left and Jimmy's way ahead
yeah and Mark and I are behind and marks
about to die it's actually good for me
to keep marking the game because my
chances for Jimmy 1v1 or not as guys
guys that should be one yeah yeah so
yeah good point
unlikely allies now Josh and I want to
take a moment to tell you about the
make-a-wish Foundation it's an
organization that grants life-changing
wishes to kids with critical illnesses
now Evan is just this amazing smart and
articulate fifteen-year-old kid on the
surface you'd never know he's had
multiple brain surgeries suffers from
chronic seizures and has too many tumors
on his kidneys to even count and sadly
there are a lot of kids out there facing
similar extreme health struggles if you
want to get involved and support these
children we encourage you to visit wish
org or if you want to know more about
Evans condition we've included
informational links to the tuberous
sclerosis Alliance in the show notes
below these are both amazing
organizations that are only made
possible through the support of people
like you there are many ways you can
help from donating to volunteering so
please find the links below and trust us
when we tell you
there is nothing like making a
difference in a kid's life all right the
next point is play to your style so
build decks that emphasize what you
enjoy about the game I think especially
when you're new yeah I define my style
as I don't care if I win as long as I
make an impact I make an impact I'm
happy with that game
I am fine newsing if with my feather
deck and this didn't happen that's game
by the way it should all be if I knock
somebody out but I was dying a few games
ago in my home Fae group and an instant
speed I had go snipe on the field oh
Gunderson a very good card yeah good
card very very good card and I can cast
a chain of five spells and I didn't take
anyone out but I made a huge impact on
that game because everyone was that like
20 like yeah so it just changes the
landscape so much yeah and then next
turn someone else lost I think but
anyway that was enough for you in that
game yes you got an assist so much
damage to everyone right that that's
hard to find my style I don't care if I
win a news I won't make an impact right
and you would think about that one deck
building maybe to be able to do like
explosive things so that you yeah it
always has a chance to like just kind of
go off we have a spike in the play group
all he wants to do is win and we have a
player who all he wants the story he
wants that fractured identity on that
crazy random Walker who can this be a
jacket on the nickel boss god fail oh
right so he has the story element to it
yeah mark you guys have done a lot of
psychographic I guess the profiling of
who the the things are and those have
changed over the years - have you found
that there's like a really effective way
for a player that's new to be like this
is what I really like or like to go into
the game and like I like blue but I
don't like what blue does by like what
red you know like sort of that well one
of these we have already talked about
it's all I'll bring it up here is if
you're going to introduce someone to the
game the most important thing is that
they enjoy themselves mmm nothing else
matters and that one of the things we're
teaching people is they must have fun
doesn't yeah you know fun they're gonna
start playing it so I let them to
prioritize other things so if you're
helping someone makes it very first deck
make it something they'll enjoy playing
correct
they're not gonna win a lot you know
where they first are playing but are
they enjoying it and having fun and and
that really is important is are you
doing things that you enjoy doing right
and if infected graphics want to do
different things that's fine but figure
out what you want to do well what makes
you happy
for some people it's do them some big
splashy crazy thing like one of the
things that I I find is making yourself
a little goal it's not necessarily
winning but here's a goal before the
game ends I want to do something I'm
gonna make a deck and I want to do
something right that winning doesn't
have to be your only goal and when
you're first starting out if you make
smaller goals it's like what I want to
make at least 20 creatures you know all
bunch of tokens and even if I lose if I
make 20 creatures I've won to myself
yeah yeah I think it's important with
beginners is give them smaller goals to
achieve so a that the room it's fun and
then they they can win even if they
don't actually win right totally yeah
like I lost my first game if I had so
much fun because my game was built
around an unclouded it was but she
stands alone that's got to make you
happy Mike come on it does the same card
yeah we were we almost had unglued we're
talking in Japanese yeah I then to being
just in English and so for a while we
were joking as the cheese has no honor
[Laughter]
all right you ready for this part Evan
oh yeah we are the show three two one go
we're done with that page okay so this
last one I added Oh cuz I feel like well
I feel like new players have a problem
this in command exactly yeah it feels
bad sometimes right yeah so I'm gonna
just give you all the new players new
commander players permission it's okay
to win go ahead okay chaos if you win
they want you to win they want you to
enjoy yourself in the way that you also
want yourself to win and you want other
people do win and enjoy themselves too
it's also okay to lose right same same
token yep yep but I think new players do
have a problem like I've seen so many
times where like
you could you could get knocked that
person out of the game and they're just
like now because it's like kind of like
feels like it's nice to not do it and
you know a lot times new players are new
to the group but they don't know
everybody as well and they don't want to
be quote unquote means that's person
I'll let Jimmy live and I'll attack Evan
even though Evans at 30 and this would
knock Jimmy out or whatever it's okay go
for the win try to win it's totally fine
you have permission no one's gonna get
mad hopefully oh yeah you're gonna
shuffle up and you're gonna play again
so well this actually happened played a
couple of extra games and there is a
point where Murph kept a hand that only
had six drops and someone had a very
aggressive commander school brat and by
a turn six before he could even play
anything he was at three life and and
player was I feel so bad about killing
you and players it's my fault yeah yeah
so I think like even veteran players
fall into this and it is a kind of a
feel bad moment because I think a lot of
times you put yourselves in the other
person's shoes and you wouldn't want to
get eliminated in a way that's
unpleasant for your you know general
experience but we're all gonna be in
that situation especially as new players
you're gonna find yourself in that
situation on both sides of it so it's
okay to just lose when you have to mana
yeah and no Ram yeah and the game does
have to end eventually yeah never ended
I mean definitely there are times I
think as you play more that you kind of
spread around the damage and you and you
let everybody have a good time I think
new players particularly have a problem
understanding at the point it's like not
just go just knock people out yeah we
need to be wrapping up you know that's
the point in the game this is and if you
don't do it you're gonna get knocked out
in yes yeah yeah although this is a high
school Club and kids got to go home you
know there's three hours okay that's
great enough for like one and a half
games with me it's a decent half game
pretty fast we played last night you
know you haven't seen my yesterday all
right so those are the the tips I we
threw the paper how it's gonna go over
them but never mind we'll list them we
just go back and watch the episode again
but we wanted to talk about a little
subtopic here which is how to teach or
encourage brand new
well thank you well thanks my and this
is something mark you're really good at
and this is something I haven't honestly
done that much recently which is you
know if nobody's if somebody hasn't
played magic at all or very little maybe
they've tried out arena a little bit so
we wanted to talk about again cuz
there's a lot of people now that are
coming into magic as arena might ask you
you made a really good point they
probably know you play magic and they
might come to you yeah and be like hey
how do I play how do I start so like the
number one thing and I think the most
important thing is starting simple I
think the first time I ever played
commander was I played magic growing up
I grew up in Seattle we played on the
sidewalks I knew how the game worked and
someone came in commander Jack and it
was an unpleasant experience cuz I
didn't know any of the cars there was so
many new interactions there are three
people playing cards I didn't know and
on top of all of that my skills were
rusty I didn't know what the phases were
so the best thing I think to do when
you're teaching someone that starts out
is to really pare it down to what the
game is about super simple so what I
would do normally is I take the the
goblins versus elves dual decks I would
take out lands and take out every single
instance sorcery suggest the creatures
remained and like we're gonna play a
game and both of us have ten life and so
you'd explain creature combat and like
all right to play another game my I
didn't sorceries let's play another game
we'll add an instance and sort of
tearing it up as you go because even if
you like watch the arena or play the
arena play through it's very similar
it's like we're gonna work through one
aspect at a time
I think commander is one of the easiest
games to have someone overwhelmed by and
in that case if that happens with their
first game and they don't have a good
time like Mark said they may never come
back to the game again so starting
simple is by far I think the most
important part of learning how to play
magic well let me jump in serving please
um so what is the number one reason
people will start playing and they never
come back to my complicated they're
intimidated yeah yeah because what
happens is people like I want to play
this and magic is an intimidating game
yeah it's complicated I mean there's
20,000 cards in existence it's a
complicated game some of them have like
old book on them come to magic most of
the time somewhere even though they
don't know all the details they're aware
of it's this very big thing
yeah and that they know the people they
know play are very intuitive and that
it's very intimidating right so the
number one reason people will not
play a second time is they they don't
want to look bet you know they people
want to feel like I can present myself
and I understand what's going on and so
part of keeping it simple is the core
part of magic isn't actually that
complicated yeah but I teach people to
play the number one thing they'll say is
oh that's not that hard the actual core
of the game isn't right later on yeah I
mean you can layer on lots of things to
make it very complicated but when you
want someone to play boil it down to the
basics yeah once again make sure they
have fun and don't if someone enjoys the
game they'll learn more stuff later
right a lot of times people feel like
well I got to teach them everything
before the first game ends and the
answer's no you don't only teach them
things they have to know to play the
game you're playing right teaching them
no more and the other big thing I like
to do when you're teaching somebody is
understand what about the game they
might enjoy for example if they're
really into the art you can lean into
that it's a very enter the story or very
into the color like whatever you think
they might like make it more about that
because you want them to have a good
first experience yeah the other big
thing and the reason like magic arena I
think it's a great teaching tool is the
judgment of other people is one of the
things that make people feel bad so one
of the reasons that playing a computer
is really good and people don't feel
judged by the computer yeah and they can
make mistakes and they can do things so
that's what I think arena is a very good
teaching tool because when you get to
play by yourself and make mistakes but
no one's watching you you feel much more
comfortable doing that yeah you're not
gonna get the side-eye from the AI it's
like what you do that cat might look at
you yeah so short story real quick I
came in on magical watch ins and my
first deck I got from a deck dolus
toolkit I open the packs and I got a
really powerful elf stack it was green
black and I have this one card that put
me into it and was one green back and it
had amazing out and it dealt damage
equals number else I control to my
opponent oh right and it was so fun it
was so great and while I always do is I
take that out hand it's a thought no you
stole the day I stole the dad I
and nucleo i say this is a simple deck
you can play this I trust you that you
can play this and I do it and I play a
mono blue tempo deck of my own I take
out law of the bounce spells and counter
spells and everything like that and it
just boils down to ten missions a few
Flyers
it's attacking and blocking mostly yeah
just a really fun experience for both of
us my recommendations people who are
trying to get new players into the game
is to have a designated new player deck
right something that you know is not
gonna be intimidating or too crazy to
start yeah
that's why I really like those dual
decks they sort of take core of things
and just boil them down to also like oh
do you like goblins great
do you like elves great so you had to
have a theme to go around and those are
very yeah you know fantasy things ropes
that like you can grab onto even if you
don't know it's like at least you sort
of know everyone knows what the dragon
is yes everyone yeah so slightly
countries you in one thing I do think
when you first start playing I would put
sorcerers in that instance in but I do
think you want a few sorceries when you
first start playing
just because spells are a big part of
the game and they kind of teach people
like more than other stuff going on and
so usually when I first talked to Pete I
I'll put a few sorceries in huh I'll
leave instance out usually when I first
instance aren't very stack is too hard
you can wait for them to learn you can
respond to things that come later one
thing I like that you said mark which
was don't try and teach them everything
all at once yeah I think people whenever
they're teaching anything this is a
really good piece of advice to take
which is make sure that they're grabbing
on to the core concepts and what happens
if you just throw too much it somebody
they don't it's like the deck building
thing too that you know it's like if you
try and do too much nothing sticks yeah
try and do a little bit really well make
sure they understand like I you know how
the casting cost and the mana lines up
and maybe I'm talking about like make
them make sure they hold onto a couple
core concepts rather than being like you
got to understand everything about the
game in this one's play sitting well one
of the things I also talked about is
think about teaching anything right
Bob's been go to a dance class or
something they're not going to say
before we here's all 10 dances you could
learn right you would pick one dance and
a simple vert like the key of teaching
so somebody is picking a microcosm of
what you want and making sure they enjoy
that
and then it builds on it you build on I
mean if they enjoy playing the game they
learn stuff but you don't like let me
explain the layers they don't need to
explain more complicated things upfront
and if they're having fun if they're
enjoying themselves they'll come back
and want to learn more people invested
will will be excited to learn more but I
think one of the biggest problems I find
with beginners is because you're so
excited you want to see all the aspects
of the game and you want to talk
strategy and all these things are just
above their head take your time
yeah wait first wait that that's a
really good point too because a lot of
times the beginner will ask you
questions yeah is actually not good for
you to answer for them so they'll say
yeah a lot times I'm just like hold on
we'll get to that you'll learn it
eventually but let's make sure we got
this down first yeah like um my mom used
to do a lot of court testimony one thing
they said is say whenever they ask you a
question answer the question of the
least number of words you can and area
it's the same when people ask you
questions which is try to give yes or no
answers and not let me explain what you
know yes you should
no you shouldn't yeah let me explain the
strategy behind it like let me give you
all the corner cases if they I'm gonna
use an example they have two one ones
you know I have a two two they are
asking should I attack and I say well I
have a two two I can kill one of your
one ones is it worth it I mean I doubt
singers news players sometimes it's like
why do want to get the damage in I think
a lot of times it's just it's just one
of those things where it's like why not
try and see what happens right we're we
don't need we can have a take back if
you want
we're not playing this game to like have
it like a full on rules whatever let's
see what happens so you can even
understand through the you know it's
sort of like hey I tried this dance move
but I slipped in I felt like well great
you learned a lot when you slipped in
you fell but magic no one's getting hurt
and you can always take it back to I
think the new play yes I like to take
backs idea to try it learn from it
you'll learn the strategy don't try and
explain the strategy all the time to
them and let them do stuff and figure
out yeah yeah I mean one of the big
things in general when you are teaching
somebody is thinking about the
experience from there and and what what
they're trying to get and that when
you're excited by something when you
really
love something there's a desire to want
to share things but it's just a matter
of doling out win and how and where you
share things right and that you just
don't want overwhelm them yeah yeah I
would say one of the most the biggest
takeaways from this is that if you
decide to be a teacher and someone that
teaches someone how to play magic there
is actually kind of an onus and a burden
on you and that you are going to be this
person's first impression of the game so
it's really really important do a good
job yes good job we want more players to
play magic but yeah I mean you are in
control of a very sort of pivotal first
impression of the game and a lot of
these things are very important because
I know you're excited about the game you
have a lot of things that you're excited
about but if you are going to convey
that excitement someone you need to do
in the way that to make sure that they
understand it like it's almost like
let's say you have an extremely evolved
palate you went you and you eat foods
you only eat the finest foods but you're
trying to introduce you give someone the
best steak of their life and you're
breaking out every single part of it
it's like you could also just let them
enjoy the steak and not have to talk
about how it was cooked why I was cooked
this way
what kind of sauces were you use like
all those things are not important to
the core thing which is I'm here to
enjoy eating this piece of food or I'm
here to enjoy playing a game and so try
and focus on what initially drew you to
the game find out what they did as well
but your experience is going to be very
I guess important for their I guess
mental awareness responsibility if
you're teaching somebody to play magic
right because you're trying to bring
them in this thing we all love yeah so
don't accidentally turn somebody against
to play commander with later
I like the steak analogy too and this is
a great one you like steak right well
yeah if you can't stop talking about the
steak buy them a pizza Oh like give them
something else in case the steak is not
there at their jam
if steak is red then pizzas greens
everything well pizzas good okay all
right all right so here's another good
tip this is just a good teaching people
tip okay which is you saying something
is not as powerful as them asking you
something and you answering yes because
when people ask questions not they're
invested in the answer because they ask
the question so he wants to know right
so when you're teaching somebody
it's much better
to not talk at them and just let them
guide the conversation let them ask the
questions because they're more invested
if they're the ones that are sort of
dictating what's being talked about and
you're curious about well how something
works yeah yeah yeah that makes a lot
sense all right two more little tips
here we have this is stuff you brought
up Evan that I like which is you know
when somebody's starting out it's really
good to let them use your decks like you
said you even carry around decks you had
some last night that you almost pulled
out I have I have five style dext I
always carry with me oh cool yeah ready
also sort of on this topic of that amuse
you our decks
I have people used elf deck and then I
can walk through once they understand
everything I walk through like okay so
you want about this much of this this
much this much this this much of this
I have so many cards so I make them or I
don't make them but if they want and
most time I teach them at my house I
have this card catalog of all my magic
outs and so if they want
I let them try and build a deck and with
my cards and whenever they do whenever
they come back I always leave it open
and tell them that they can change
whatever they want
I had one my friends Rhine sword he went
from a mono green stompy deck to a Simic
ramp deck and it was well built is very
powerful and it was all of your cards it
was off my house yeah we couldn't even
build it myself I find one of the things
that new players there's like a you know
once they get and they understand the
game the next big hurdle is deck
building a lot of a lot of players have
like they're intimidated by that part of
the process right yeah that's another
hurdle that like kiddie some players
never even crossing with a they never
really built their own decks which is
why we made a commander - yeah we
literally sell decks going you want to
play commander here will sell you the
deck you can just play this deck yeah
you start from a five-percent there at
the very least or you can play nothing
it never changes yeah it's a big dragon
deck it plays dragons it's fun yeah i
think that i mean i would say huge
number of our episodes are dedicated
just to deck building joe cuz i mean
like it is i think for me it's the most
intimidating part when you're starting
out especially when it requires an
investment you have to buy cards or you
have to borrow them so i think what you
said evan is actually really important
if you if you are someone that's
teaching you have the ability to build
some on the deck or at least give them a
start on the collection because you can
build very powerful decks just with
commons uncommons cards aren't worth
that much cards that you could just go
to your LGS and they'll have lying
around as well and i think that's one of
the the fun parts my magic is it's a
very generous audience in general i
found that new players especially at pre
releases will just give you I'll give my
draft chaff away to anyone just like
please use something with this and I'm
not going to but it's gonna bring you a
huge larger amount of joy than it would
me and bad to me it's what's important
just me yeah so when you're first
teaching somebody if you can give them
some cards at the end of teaching them
for them to keep yeah that is very
powerful yeah I have friends who called
LGS asked when a pre alesis then they're
like great thanks hang up and then they
go after the pre-release
and pick up like comms and uncommons
then don't yeah people don't want and
then they just build it back from that
yeah just get your ik and then put any
other cards in there all right I think
that's gonna wrap up our discussion
we're running a little long which is
great I was glad we always ask a
question that to our listeners and this
one is maybe obvious what's your advice
out there for new commander players what
strategies have used to help Shepherd
people into the formats we'd like to
hear from you in the comments on Twitter
in email I don't know anywhere on email
write a letter of course this show is
brought to you by card Kingdom so you
use the affiliate link car can become
slash command zone especially they have
their they have their awesome pre-made
decks as well so that's true little
experiments
yeah a lot of people understand that
Magic's a hard game to get into so card
Kingdom has done a great job in sort of
shepherding the experience like you said
as well so you can check that out use
our affiliate link and when you get
those decks or when you get your cards
make sure you put
them into an ultra pro sleeve play them
out onto a nice ultra yeah lay math you
know what the new player wants maybe
they want this Soren or maybe they want
the game let's play Matt or maybe they
want Sybil Sybil fair trade will fit
everyone was the fable fat now I still
think the song let's go everybody okay
yes by supporting alder Pro card Kingdom
all of our sponsors you really are
supporting all of our content we super
appreciate everybody that does that okay
we didn't prep you guys for this Evan
you might have been ready though because
you you know we didn't I know I now it's
time for the end step where we talk
about something cool outside the world
of magic should be like a book you've
read a place you've eaten the movie
you've seen anything at all Evan do you
have something cool you want to talk
about well as they've mentioned earlier
I'm here co-chief Make A Wish which is
amazing and they we are here and we've
been doing so much outside of Magic the
Gathering yesterday we went into a
skydiving and it was so fun oh yeah what
do you like they suit you up and you're
like one of the big window things yeah
it's like what it's like a tunnel like
yeah I was picking this room in the yeah
Loara probably the oldest one in this
room would you know would you recommend
the experience oh yes it was amazing dad
didn't even know that the person in
there was letting go of him oh so that
was fun that he was just fine did he did
he crash and burn or did it a little how
about you did you did you eat flips or
anything cool like now time means go
there like twice at minimum Josh we just
talked about teaching new players magic
and you're asking if you did how long do
you get they give you you can one sign
up is two times and lunch time is one
minute
oh nice that's how long that's longer
than actual yes I've done it once and
you would be it you are not in control
the first time you go in there cuz you
do this or you move a slight hand and
all of a sudden your entire legs have to
be the repartee and you really have to
go state control this time all I did was
walk my feet like I bent them
too much the first time and then after
that I had one hand signal for
correction no nice so so you headed down
after that yeah one axe actual skydiver
yeah and I think I got like 27 seconds
of freefall before I had to pull the
ship for you screaming the whole time
right guys the thing is you're you are
screaming I was screaming I'll admit it
but it's still there's so much air
coming at you and then immediately your
mouth is just crazy dry you can't scream
anymore mark anything outside the world
of magic I do my family did something
really cool last week out cool we
participated in the 48 hour film my
family my family five Friday night at 7
p.m. we got we pulled from a hat we got
one of two genres to pick from okay we
got mystery or period piece we did
mystery we and then everybody everybody
gets their own genres but everybody had
everybody participating there was an
object we had to have which was a
lanyard there was a character we had to
have which was Harry or Harriet Biddle
mechanic and then there was a line which
is the depth of your ignorance is deep
the line the prop and the character
every single film had to have that and
then you had 48 hours if 48 hours you
turned it in Wow shoot it edit it
everything in 48 hours how much hours
did you sleep in that 48 hours I mean we
we we aimed low for our like we but we
were trying to do something you ended up
being like five minutes and one movie s
between four and seven minutes okay at
some point I will post it online I can't
post till after the screening
okay post it online I was very happy I
thought we came we did a good job have
you done one of those before
I never no never that yeah but your
daughter's made some amazing videos I've
ones that you Rachel and I have done
videos together so yeah she's great at
directing editing so that's awesome yeah
that's awesome that's cool I like all
directing and editing me too all right
we'll make sure something else that is
directed and edited my patented segue
just got there no problem nobody even
noticed is our sister podcasting masters
of modern Alex Kessler and Ben Bateman
they talked about the modern format and
all things competitive magic you can
find them on Twitter at the mm cast
also probably the best way is just go on
youtube and type in masters of modern
they pop right up because they do videos
now yeah exactly
oh you find them all also iTunes
stitcher all your apps here is yes our
editors for the show are Ashlyn Rose and
Jake boss who just joined the team down
here in Los Angeles
big thanks to Geoffrey Palmer who does
the cool living card animations behind
us you can find them on Twitter at
living cards MTG or find his animations
at the beginning and end of every show
at youtube.com slash commands on podcast
and you want to watch the video for this
because we said tons of cards and then
someone was forced to put them on screen
of course oh we have three cameras which
we usually they did that evan mark thank
you so much for joining us thank you for
having us on well thanks yeah all right
now let's go play some magic all right
everybody bye I mean peace
[Music]
thank you for your attention for further
inquiries send an email to command caste
at rocketjump calm or ask us on twitter
at jf Wong and at Josh Lacroix see you
later alligator
greetings
[Laughter]